# Communication: Proximate

Communication can broadly be defined as when a signal from a ***sender*** affects the behavior of the ***receiver***. Communication is essential for coordinating social behaviors including courtship, mating, parenting, rivalry, and alarm signaling. However, communication can occur in a variety of modalities.

***Q1: How would you define communication?***

***Q2: In order to achieve communication, what steps/processes in the sender and the receiver need to be fulfilled by proximate mechanisms?***  

## Acoustic

### Sender: motor patterns

*Xenopus* is a frog genus in which the mechanisms and evolution of acoustic communication has been extensively studied. 

The basic vocal unit of all *Xenopus* calls is a brief sound pulse. Each pulse is generated by two "arytenoid discs" in the larynx being rapidly pulled apart. These pulses are then combined into a variety of temporal patterns that have social meanings.[^xenopus-vocal-mech] 

[^xenopus-vocal-mech]: Because of its evolutionary history of return to water from
land, Xenopus have evolved a specialized mechanism of sound production within the larynx. The sound-producing elements are two tightly apposed arytenoid cartilage discs at the anterior end of the larynx. Action potentials of axons in laryngeal nerves leads to simultaneous contraction of paired bipennate muscles connected to the discs by tendons. Contraction generates rapid separation of the discs, which creates a single pulse of sound as the larynx vibrates within the thorax, effectively coupled to the body and the surrounding water.[^Kelley-et-al-2020] 

[^Kelley-et-al-2020]: [Darcy B. Kelley, Irene H. Ballagh, Charlotte L. Barkan, Andres Bendesky, Taffeta M. Elliott, Ben J. Evans, Ian C. Hall, Young Mi Kwon, Ursula Kwong-Brown, Elizabeth C. Leininger, Emilie C. Perez, Heather J. Rhodes, Avelyne Villain, Ayako Yamaguchi and Erik Zornik (2020) Generation, Coordination, and Evolution of Neural Circuits for Vocal Communication. Journal of Neuroscience, 40 (1) 22-36](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0736-19.2019)

:::{figure} /images/xenopus-vocal-repertoire.png
:width: 600

The vocal repertoire of *X. laevis* is sexually differentiated and specific to social context.[^Kelley-et-al-2020]  
- The male ***advertisement call*** consists of individual sound pulses at fast (60 pps) and slow (30 pps) rates. Males produce advertisement calls when alone or with conspecifics. 
- The female ***rapping call*** consists of a rapid (16 pps) series of sound pulses. Females produce rapping when oviposition is imminent. Rapping serves as an acoustic aphrodisiac and stimulates ***male answer calling***. 
- The female ***ticking call*** is a slower (6 pps) series of pulses. Females extend their hind legs and produce ticking when clasped.  
- A male clasping another frog, male or female, produces the ***amplectant call***. 
- A clasped male responds with ***growling***. 
- During the social interactions that precede one male vocally suppressing another, males produce the ***chirping call***.  
Modified from Zornik and Kelley, 2011. pps: pulses per second.
:::

Serotonin (5-HT) plays a crucial role in initiating vocalization. Exogenous application to the brain promotes (but does not trigger) the advertisement calling motor neuron pattern of activity, as does elevating endogenous serotonin levels using a serotonin "reuptake inhibitor". Endogenous serotonin thus contributes to call initiation.


In *Xenopus*, vocal signals differ between the sexes, through development, and across the genus, reflecting evolutionary divergence in sensory and motor circuits that can be interrogated mechanistically.

::::{margin} Species-specific intrinsic oscillations
:::{image} /images/xenopus-cpg-fast-trill-NMDA.png
:::
::::

For example, differences in intrinsic membrane properties of vocal CPG neurons explain differences in species-specific vocal patterns. In all species, a combination of several different voltage-sensitive ion channels make the membrane potential of CPG neurons ***oscillate endogenously*** when provided with a steady (unpatterned) command input.

:::{figure} /images/xenopus-cpg-fast-trill.png
:width: 800

A vocal CPG underlies divergent vocalizations in *X. laevis* and *X. petersii*.  The vocal motor nucleus (VMN) contains motor neurons that project to vocal muscles in the larynx (the vocal effector organ). Voltage spikes in the vocal nerve exactly match the temporal features of the vocalizations. Premotor neurons in the Parabrachial Nucleus (PB) project to the vocal motor nucleus. The PB neurons of different species have different endogenous oscillation patterns.[^Barkan-2018]
:::

[^Barkan-2018]: [Barkan, C. L., Kelley, D. B., & Zornik, E. (2018). Premotor Neuron Divergence Reflects Vocal Evolution. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 38(23), 5325–5337.](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0089-18.2018)

A similar type of CPG has been found in midshipman fish. You are already familiar with the mating "humming" of midshipman fish. Two other types of vocalizations that they produce are ***grunts*** and ***growls***.

[Plainfin Midshipman Grunt](https://vimeo.com/227099929)

[Plainfin Midshipman Growl](https://vimeo.com/227099654)

The location and electrical properties of vocal CPG neurons (and the synaptic connections among them) in midshipman fish have been identified. In midshippman fish, unlike in *Xenopus*, the call frequency and duration are controlled by separate neuron types in separate locations of the brain.

:::{figure} /images/vocal-cpg-midshipman.png
:width: 500

Collectively, the Prepacemaker-Pacemaker-Motorneuron circuit is referred to as the vocal CPG. Nuclei within forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain vocal-acoustic centers form part of a descending vocal system that includes links with the auditory system and controls vocalization initiation. A copy ("corollary discharge") of the vocalization duration signal get sent to auditory input regions of the brain as well. 
:::

***Q3: Why do you think a copy ("corollary discharge") of the vocalization duration signal get sent to auditory input regions of the brain in addition to motor output regions?***

### Receiver: pattern recognition 

How are received communication signals perceived and identified correctly? How does sensory input access neural elements that in turn generate an appropriate communication response (ie. how is perception linked to production)?

In *Xenopus*, researchers have identified a key forebrain node that links auditory and vocal production circuits to match socially appropriate vocal responses to ***acoustic features*** of male and female calls.

The central nucleus of the amygdala (***CeA***) is a strong candidate for a role in auditory-guided vocal communication. It receives input from the auditory processing pathways of the brain and projects to parabrachial nucleus (***PB***; where CPG neurons are located). 

:::{image} /images/xenopus-cea-schematic.png
:width: 500
:::

Normally, female rapping vocalizations evoke answer calling in males. In males with damage to the CeA, female rapping evokes prolonged vocal suppression.   
Prolonged vocal suppression should only be evoked by the calls of dominant males, not rapping. Even when tested with an actual rapping female, males without a CeA do not answer call.[^Hall-2013]   
Males with damaged CeA do call spontaneously (so they are not mute). They also respond to male advertisement calls with prolonged vocal suppression, so they are not deaf and can produce the socially appropriate response to a dominant male.  
***Damage to the CeA thus results in socially inappropriate responses of males to female, but not to male, calls***.

[^Hall-2013]: [Ian C. Hall, Irene H. Ballagh, Darcy B. Kelley (2013) The Xenopus Amygdala Mediates Socially Appropriate Vocal Communication Signals. Journal of Neuroscience 33(36).](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1190-13.2013)


So how are patterns identified?   

At the ***periphery*** sensory receptor neurons are ***tuned to*** very basic stimulus features (like one frequency of sound or light at one small location in space).   

In the ***brain***, there are neurons that are ***tuned to*** specific stimulus patterns. This tuning is created progressively. Along a sensory processing pathway, cells are optimally activated by an integrated combination of simpler ***receptive fields***.  

Receptive field ***tuning*** is a bit easier to understand in the visual system than the auditory system. 

In the retina, photoreceptor neurons are each ***tuned to*** light/dark at a specific location in space. This spatial tuning is determined by the physical location of the photoreceptor on the retina. Photoreceptors then ***converge*** onto post-synaptic neurons in specific combinations so that the post-synaptic neurons (for example ***Retinal Ganglion Cells*** (RGCs) are tuned to more complex features. 

:::{figure} /images/receptive-field-rgc.jpg
:width: 600

A classic Retinal Ganglion cell's ***center-surround*** visual receptive field is constructed from a set of photoreceptor neurons that are themselves tuned to light at various locations in space. 
:::

RGCs then converge onto "simple cells" in the thalamus (LGN) to create even more specialized receptive fields. LGN neurons are no longer able to be activated by light at one location in space like the photoreceptors were. 

:::{figure} /images/simple-cell-rf.png
:width: 500

A neural network for the ***simple receptive field*** in the LGN (lateral geniculat nucleus), which receives input from retinal ganglion cells. 
:::

### Learned versus Innate

The behavioral trait typically studied as “vocal learning” involves “the influence of auditory information, including feedback, on vocal development” (Nottebohm, 1972).

Vocal-learning species share the presence of: 
- a critical period for learning
- babbling
- deafness-induced deterioration of learned vocalizations
- dialects
- brain circuits that control production and learning of vocalizations. 

In humans, there is a dedicated ***language-related brain network*** involving multiple  circuits. It is well established that ***Broca's area*** in the left frontal lobe and ***Wernicke's area*** in the left temporal lobe are central brain regions in this network. Among other functions, Broca's area is involved in speech production and generation and processing of language syntax, while Wernicke's area plays a major role in speech perception and comprehension. 

In the songbird brain, there is a dedicated ***communication brain network*** with similar neural dissociation between a neural network for song production (the ‘song system’, including the song nucleus HVC, used as a proper noun) and brain regions that are involved in song perception and recognition (including the caudomedial nidopallium, NCM). In a functional sense, these networks in songbirds are considered to be analogous to Broca's and Wernicke's areas in humans, respectively.[^Moorman-2015]

:::{figure} /images/wernicke-broca.png
:width: 500

Similar critical brain regions underlying auditory communication in humans (left) and songbirds (right). 
:::

[^Moorman-2015]: [Moorman, S., Gobes, S., van de Kamp, F. et al. Learning-related brain hemispheric dominance in sleeping songbirds. Sci Rep 5, 9041 (2015).](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep09041)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-GsVhbmecJA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


More specifically, vocal-learning brain circuits include striatal (Figure 121, pink) as well as cortical (Figure 121, green) vocal brain regions, a loop of synaptic connections among cortical and striatal regions (Figure 121, white arrows), and a unique direct connection from motor cortical areas (human laryngeal motor cortex (LMC) and songbird robust nucleus of the arcopallium (RA)) to brainstem vocal motor and respiratory neurons for phonation (Figure 121, red arrow). 

:::{figure} /images/vocal-learning-nonlearning-brains.jpeg
:width: 700

Sagittal (looking sideways at the head) slices of the brain of humans and song-learning birds ( ie. songbird, parrot, and hummingbird) as well as vocal-nonlearning nonhuman primates (macaque) and birds (dove and quail).  
Songbird Area X, a striatal region necessary for vocal learning, is most similar to a part of the human striatum activated during speech production. The RA (robust nucleus of the arcopallium) analog of song-learning birds, necessary for song production, is most similar to laryngeal motor cortex regions in humans that control speech production. Red arrows show the direct projections found only in vocal learners, from vocal motor cortex regions to brainstem vocal motor neurons. Forebrain song nuclei are absent in vocal non-learning species.[^Pfenning-2015]
:::

[^Pfenning-2015]: [Convergent transcriptional specializations in the brains of humans and song-learning birds](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1256846)

#### Mechanisms of learning

In order to learn vocalizations, an animal needs both a tutor and a way to compare the tutor's vocalizations to their own attempts. A general circuit concept has been hypothesized, but its implementation in brain circuits is still mostly illusive. 

:::{figure} /images/song-learning-schematic-circuit.png
:width: 300

Evaluation of auditory feedback during singing is hypothesized to result in “error” signals that reach the song system. 
:::

In the brain of the sender, dopamine activity is suppressed when learned communication signals are worse than predicted, and activated when learned communication signals are better than predicted. Therefore, dopamine could provide a ***teaching signal*** for vocal learning.

:::{figure} /images/VTA-encode-prediction-error.png
:width: 500

Top to bottom: spectrograms, Dopamine neuron spiking activity during undistorted and distorted trials, corresponding spike raster plots and rate histograms. Horizontal bars in histograms indicate significant deviations from baseline.[^Gadagkar-2016]. 
:::

[^Gadagkar-2016]: [Gadagjar et al (2016) Dopamine neurons encode performance error in singing birds. Science, 354(6317).](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aah6837)

## Turn-taking

Turn-taking and inter-personal coordination in general, is critical for communication. This behavior is ubiquitous across both vocal learners and non-learners. The function of this behavior is not clear, but there are many possibilities including: group cohesion, avoidance of "jamming" each other's signals, dominance/submissive displays, and sexual selection. 

Humans demonstrate this behavior even before learning their adult vocalizations.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_JmA2ClUvUY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

:::{figure} /images/vocal-turn-taking.jpg
:width: 500

Vocal coordination is exhibited by diverse species.[^Wirthlin-2019]
:::

[^Wirthlin-2019]: [Morgan Wirthlin, Edward F. Chang, Mirjam Knörnschild, Leah A. Krubitzer, Claudio V. Mello, Cory T. Miller, Andreas R. Pfenning, Sonja C. Vernes, Ofer Tchernichovski, Michael M. Yartsev. (2019) A Modular Approach to Vocal Learning: Disentangling the Diversity of a Complex Behavioral Trait. Neuron, Volume 104, Issue 12019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.09.036)


## Visual

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WW_N3MQBjoE" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

:::{figure} /images/Young_male_chimp.png
:width: 300

The fear grin is a facial expression that signals submission. The fear grin is used by young chimpanzees when approaching a dominant male in their troop (hypothesis: it indicates they accept the male's dominance). Image credit: [The 'fear grin'](http://www.ck12.org/book/CK-12-Biology-Advanced-Concepts/section/14.9/) by CK-12 Foundation, CC BY-NC 3.0
:::

:::{figure} /images/Ranitomeya_amazonica.jpg
:width: 400

The bright coloration of some toxic species, such as the poison dart frog, acts as a do-not-eat warning signal to predators.
:::

## Olfactory

:::{figure} /images/Knapsack_ants.svg
:width: 500

This diagram shows pheromone trails laid down by ants to direct others in the colony to sources of food. When a food source is rich, ants will deposit pheromone on both the outgoing and return legs of their trip, building up the trail and attracting more ants. When the food source is about to run out, the ants will stop adding pheromone on the way back, letting the trail fade out. Image credit: [Knapsack ants](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Knapsack_ants.svg) by Dake, CC BY 2.5
:::

## Additional Resources

- [Morgan Wirthlin, Edward F. Chang, Mirjam Knörnschild, Leah A. Krubitzer, Claudio V. Mello, Cory T. Miller, Andreas R. Pfenning, Sonja C. Vernes, Ofer Tchernichovski, Michael M. Yartsev. (2019) A Modular Approach to Vocal Learning: Disentangling the Diversity of a Complex Behavioral Trait. Neuron, Volume 104, Issue 12019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2019.09.036)
- [Mechanisms in Bird Song](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2021.04.009)
- [Ronacher, B. Innate releasing mechanisms and fixed action patterns: basic ethological concepts as drivers for neuroethological studies on acoustic communication in Orthoptera. J Comp Physiol A 205, 33–50 (2019).](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00359-018-01311-3)
- [Hillert, D.G. (2021). Neurobiology of Language. In: Shackelford, T.K., Weekes-Shackelford, V.A. (eds) Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Psychological Science. Springer, Cham.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-19650-3_3334)
- [Darcy B. Kelley, Irene H. Ballagh, Charlotte L. Barkan, Andres Bendesky, Taffeta M. Elliott, Ben J. Evans, Ian C. Hall, Young Mi Kwon, Ursula Kwong-Brown, Elizabeth C. Leininger, Emilie C. Perez, Heather J. Rhodes, Avelyne Villain, Ayako Yamaguchi and Erik Zornik (2020) Generation, Coordination, and Evolution of Neural Circuits for Vocal Communication. Journal of Neuroscience, 40 (1) 22-36](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0736-19.2019)
- [Barkan, C. L., Kelley, D. B., & Zornik, E. (2018). Premotor Neuron Divergence Reflects Vocal Evolution. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 38(23), 5325–5337.](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0089-18.2018)
- The Xenopus Amygdala Mediates Socially Appropriate Vocal Communication Signals
Ian C. Hall, Irene H. Ballagh, Darcy B. Kelley
Journal of Neuroscience 4 September 2013, 33 (36) 14534-14548; DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1190-13.2013
- [Hubel & Wiesel's demonstration of simple, complex and hypercomplex cells in the cat's visual cortex](https://youtu.be/jw6nBWo21Zk)